---
layout: post
title: Kanidm[5]
---

## June 27
Monday TODO list:
* Rebase tracing-logging [#467](https://github.com/kanidm/kanidm/pull/467) to `master`.
* Respond to feedback on tracing-memberof [#497](https://github.com/kanidm/kanidm/pull/497).

The past weekend, William gave me some feedback on my PRs, including suggesting rebasing `tracing-logging` [#467](https://github.com/kanidm/kanidm/pull/467) to `master`. I wasn't quite ready to have my changes merged yet, but I'd never done a rebase before and decided that it wouldn't hurt. I ended up spending about an hour trying to figure it out, but even when I resolved all the conflicts, the files still weren't correct because some lines weren't getting updates, causing me to get the red squigglies. I didn't want to waste more time, and since it wasn't a top priority, I ended up aborting the resolved conflicts and leaving a comment on the PR.

In my `tracing-memberof` PR, William suggested that I implement my own [`Subscriber`](https://docs.rs/tracing/0.1.26/tracing/trait.Subscriber.html). However, I ran into a big problem: there were a lot of methods that called for updating the internal state, but accepted `self` immutably. What the heck? It mentioned passing `Visitor` objects that can collect information, but that didn't change the fact the `self` was immutable. It was also really frustrating because the documentation literally said to "update any internal state", suggesting that there's not some other way that I was missing.

## June 28
Tuesday TODO list:
* Review GitHub comments.
* Continue thinking about implementing my own `Subscriber`.

An idea that I had before I started work was that maybe `Subscriber`s always take themselves immutably because they are designed to be concurrent, and therefore are intended to use some alternate method of synchronizing logs. The easiest way to do this is with an `Arc<Mutex<_>>`, but I figured there had to be a better way.

I started off by reviewing William's latest PR, Add statistical analysis to indexes [#505](https://github.com/kanidm/kanidm/pull/505). It took me 2.5 hours to review, and I thought it was really cool how we used statistics to create diagnostics that helped us optimize the code. Maybe double majoring with statistics will be useful! I'm still _very_ impressed with the amount of code that he's able to produce. It seems like he's pumping out massive PRs every two weeks or so.

After code review, I continued brainstorming for how to implement my own `Subscriber`. I initially wanted to create a custom `Layer` objects that wrapped the existing `FmtSubscriber` implementation. This would provide the option to have the default `Subscriber` just shoot everything to `stderr` or a file normally, and have filters choose when and how to send information to the wrapped `Subscriber`. I wasn't entirely sure if this was how it worked, but the documentation was very confusing and there wasn't any big-picture diagrams to explain anything. I ended up pretty frustrated, but I felt like I was making some progress at least.

Ugh. I tried for another hour to figure things out. Everything in `tracing_subscriber` is so convoluted. Everything is wrapped in 20 layers of traits and wrapper structs. There are nested on nested on nested generics. There's a `Layer` struct, a `Layer` trait, and another `Layered` struct. Some of them implemented `tracing::subscriber::Subscriber`, some of them `tracing_subscriber::Subscribe`. Who the hell designed this? And worse, who decided "Ah yes, lets publicize this and not give any diagrams for how anything works"? It was impossible to tell if I was doing anything right, and worse, they make no effort to describe their thought process. I was having doubts about trying to tackle something this big. I wasn't even sure if Kanidm would benefit that much from using `tracing`. All very frustrating.

## June 30
Wednesday TODO list:
* Review responses to my questions on Williams PR [#505](https://github.com/kanidm/kanidm/pull/505).
* Find something else to work on to take a break from `tracing`.

I reviewed William's responses to the slopeyness magic, and I think I really have an understanding for what it's used for now. Essentially, outsiders can send Kanidm filters to query for entries in the db. Sometimes these filters have a bunch of parameters, and we find the results of the query by first finding all the entries that match the first parameter, and then looking through those for the ones that match the second parameter, and so on. The issue is that if we start with a very broad parameter, the number of entries stays large initially, making the filter much slower. However, if we sort the parameters (having no impact on the final result because it has to do them all anyways), we can organize them in a way such that the most narrow filters are applied first, therefore cutting down the amount of entries we have to search through for more broad filters.

I decided to say "screw it" and continue working on `tracing` afterwords, but with a much more loose grip on what I hoped to accomplish. William pointed out that I'm going into unknown territory and therefore shouldn't feel bad about not making hard progress each day, as long as I was learning and progressing towards deciding whether or not `tracing` would be a good idea.

With this in mind, I did a little more digging through the docs and it looked like I needed to use a [`Registry`](https://docs.rs/tracing-subscriber/0.2.18/tracing_subscriber/registry/struct.Registry.html). The source code showed fields containing what looked like threading behavior and a `RefCell`, which definitely seemed like the right direction for storing `span` information.

After some more research, I found that I could also store the logs contained in a span inside of the `Registry` using [`extensions`](https://docs.rs/tracing-subscriber/0.2.19/tracing_subscriber/registry/trait.SpanData.html#tymethod.extensions). It said it can store user-defined data, so I was hoping I could have it store some sort of `Vec` of logs, but I still had some more research to do on that.

The main point was that all the interior mutability and `span` storage behavior seemed to already exist, meaning my job was significantly easier. All I had to do was figure out how to piece everything together. My main idea at the time was to have `Vec` of logs in some form (`String`? Some other type?) as an extension of each `span` in the `Registry`, and then when `try_close` was called when a `span` ended, all the logs would get appended to that `span`s parent, or if it had none, to `stderr` or some preconfigured file. 

This would do allow us to do a few things:
1. All activity within a `span` would get logged at the the point in time at which it closed.
2. Things would work with `async`, unlike `AuditScope`.

Something annoying that I kept running into is that the links in the docs are consistently broken. This was particularly annoying when it mentioned something I thought was going to be useful, but then end up having to search for it through the search bar.

I decided to call it a day there because my brain was fried. However, I finally felt like I was making it over the roadblock I'd been stuck on. I just had to understand how to piece all the provided parts together.

## July 1
Thursday TODO list:
* Respond to PR comments.
* Research `Registry` type and `Layer` trait more, work on basic implementation.

Thursday started off by reviewing William's clarifying responses on my comments on [#505](https://github.com/kanidm/kanidm/pull/505). Although I was getting a stronger understanding, there were definitely aspects that I needed to revisit later with fresh eyes. I generally had a good understanding of what the slopyness factor does, but I was still shakey on how filtering as a whole works.

Ugh. I was still struggling to figure out how anything pieced together. Ultimately, I needed to end up with a `Subscriber`. I figured the way to do this was by using a `Layered` object composed of a type that implemented `Layer` (which wraps a `Subscriber`), and `Subscriber`, although I wasn't sure why it had two `Subscriber`s.

More docs digging revealed that `Registry`s are meant to get wrapped in `Layer`s. I still didn't know what the other wrapped `Subscriber` was used for. Generating `Id`s?

I found that a `Registry`s extensions are implemented in a very cool way. It stores a mapping where the key is an actual type, which I would guess make lookups instant because they're done at compile time? Not sure, don't quote me on it.

By the end of the day, I was able to create a basic type containing a `Layered` struct, which wrapped my own custom `Layer` wrapping a `Registry`. Pushed it to GitHub and hoping to get feedback tomorrow!

## July 2
Friday TODO list:
* Get formatting and timestamps working on `KaniSubscriber`.
* Add custom macros for `KaniSubscriber` that wrap `tracing` macros.

Friday began with the usual docs digging. I was working on getting timing to work by having a custom `timed` field. This was going to get wrapped in a macro:
```rust
// `info_timespan` is custom macro defined within Kanidm...
info_timespan!("Performance segment");
// ... which desugars to
tracing::info_span!("Performance segment", timed = tracing::field::Empty);
```
Essentially, the `timed` field will be a flag to tell the subscriber whether or not to time the duration of the span. I also decided to have it be a "present or not present" flag and not a boolean flag because a) less memory I guess (?), and b) finding if a field exists is somehow easier than finding out the associated value, and I was tired of reading the docs.

I was also annoyed that fields had to have values (or `tracing::field::Empty`), since it meant everything was more verbose. I spent a good 15 minutes before I figured this out from the docs.

Another really frustrating issue I came across was that the `on_close` and `on_exit` methods were called super ambiguously. `on_exit` is supposed to be called when the `span` is exited, which can happen multiple times. `on_close` is supposed to be called when the `span` is dropped. However, I found that `on_close` was never being called (I even unconditionally `panic`d inside and... no panic), so I put the closing behavior in `on_exit`. However, this caused the issue of allowing logs to be written before the `span` is done producing, which I was trying to avoid. Definitely an area for further research.

I dug through the source code for how `FmtSubscriber` handled this, and it seemed as though the trait interface behaved exactly how I expected it should, so I really didn't understand why my code wasn't consistent with that.

On the other hand, I was able to get basic timing working, which I accomplished by loosely copying the source code for `FmtSubscriber`.

## Weekly Reflections
Even though I didn't produce the most lines of code this week, I certainly believe my Rust abilities improved immensely. I think I was already fairly competent writing Rust code by myself, and was already improving at reading others' code through code reviews. However, I took a big leap forward this week by combining the two, and forcing myself to integrate my own code with the internals of existing libraries.

I think forcing yourself to see how others think in code is incredibly valuable, especially when you disagree, but also know their code is used and trusted by millions of developers. The whole process reminded me of when I attempted to first learn Rust, and could barely get anything past the compiler. I constantly thought "This can't be right. Whoever designed this is an idiot!" But slowly, I began to understand and gain an immense appreciation for the genius design choices taken.

I've attempted to interface with the internals of `serde` before and ultimately gave up. My experience reading the docs for `tracing` felt similarly frustraing, so I'm really happy I powered through and am making good progress now. Next week, I hope to get a fully functioning prototype I can start implementing in more areas of the code base!


